---
id: 5
title: Road to PhD - day 777
excerpt: Keeping track of my academical pursuit
date: 2021-04-18
---

# {{$frontmatter.title}}

It's been two years since I started my PhD studies and I decided to
occasionally make a small writeup of current goings-on, just to retain my
sanity and see progress. These posts will be a series, each having this same
introduction and a structure where I write about what was done in the past,
what is the current state and the plans for the future.

So roughly two years ago I walked into the University of Zagreb's Faculty of
Electrical Engineering and Computing building and enrolled in a doctoral study
in computing. The programme lasts for three years, every year having different
milestones that need to be satisfied before continuing to the next one. The
first year requires its students to present a seminar that gives an overview of
the current state-of-the-art scientific work in their field of research. The
second year requires the students to complete at least 5 subjects and present
another seminar, this time talking about the concrete scientific contribution
they plan to make. At the end of the final year, students must have a paper
published in a Q1 or Q2 journal, at least two conference papers and a doctoral
disertation. They defend this disertation in the final presentation that they
give aaaand, BOOM, doctor.

## Past

Since this is the first post in what I hope will be a series, so this segment
will probably be longer then in the other posts, unless the next entry is also
written in two years. I started with the doctoral study in the summer semester
of academical year 2018/2019. In the first year, I've listened to lectures of
all the subjects I enrolled in and started working on completing them. All
subjects had a format where students would listen to lectures, apply the
learned knowledge to their field of research and write a short paper explaining
what they did, which the professors used to decide on a grade. The subjects I
took focused on social network analysis, data mining, rule engines,
probabilistics and electricity transport forecasting. In the first year I also
completed the first milestone, give an overview of my field of research.

The second year started off with focus on completing all the subjects I took.
I managed to do this successfully and there were even some additional benefits,
aside from learning something new and finishing a part of the second year
milestones. One thing was a conference paper that I managed to publish,
together with another colleague I worked with, more on that in the
[portfolio](../portfolio/grid_resilience). I also published two open-source
repositories, one for a rule engine and another for implementation of the DMN
standard using the same rule engine, I also write about this in my
[portfolio](../portfolio/ruly). These repositories are not currently actively
maintained, but this might change in the future, especially if I notice they
are getting used. As for other subjects, their results may also get published
in a conference paper, after they get expanded and polished a bit further.

Last thing I did on the second year is working on the actual scientific
contribution. I set up the experiment, it worked well and I am currently
writing a paper I hope to publish in a strong scientific journal. I will
definitely plan to cover it here, as well, but I would like to finish it before
discussing its details. The second milestone, the seminar describing the
scientific contribution was also delayed for this reason, as my supervisor and
I agreed that it would be better to receive peer review for the contribution,
prior to commiting to the college on the topic of it. I would recommend this to
anyone in a similar situation, as commiting to a topic before publishing it
might be a bit risky - what if it turns out that no journal will publish a
paper on the promised topic?

My feelings on happenings so far are a bit mixed. Completing my subjects was
fulfilling and I got some benefits from that, but it also took away a lot of my
time and focus from my main research. Since I knew what I wanted to do for my
PhD before even enrolling in the programme, working on these subjects felt a
bit distracting and buerocratical. I have the same feelings about the second
year milestone - commitment to a contribution before an article describing that
contribution is published seems a bit illogical, especially because there might
be negative consequences if the topic does not end up getting published. I'm
not particularly glad I had to prolong my studies for a semester because of
that.

## Present

Currently I am working on a paper that should be my scientific contribution. I
am pleased with the progress, altough I feel I could improve my writing
process. I am trying to make myself write every day, just to keep the habit.

## Future

The current plan is to publish the paper I am working on and to complete the
second year milestone of the programme. I would also like to expand one of the
research I did for another subject to write a conference paper around it, but
this has a secondary priority. Since I took an extra semester for my study, I
also like the idea of coming up with two more strong papers, so I can complete
my studies with the nordic model, but these are just good wishes as I haven't
even started the experiments I plan to do. And this is pretty much it, so far.
Hopefully I do the next check-in in a week or two, it mostly depends on how
much I will have to write about.
