---
id: 7
title: Road to PhD - day 1400
excerpt: Keeping track of my academical pursuit
date: 2022-12-29
---

# {{$frontmatter.title}}

So much for making this a series. Let's go, same structure, some 700 days after
the previous one.

## Past

Naturally, before starting to write this post, I read the previous one, just to
see where I am compared to it. Last time I wrote, the main piece of work was
the scientific contribution. About a year from the time writing that post, I
managed, with incredible help from my mentors, to
[publish](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9734070) my main
scientific contribution in a Q1 journal. This was definitely the greatest
Ph.D-related success of the year and has brought me significant relief.
Alongside the publication itself, I have also open-sourced the core framework
that I used to set up the case study in the paper, further described
[here](/portfolio/aimm).

Additionally, about a half of year before publishing the paper, I have also
managed to defend my Ph.D. title and contributions. This was a presentation in
which I described the summary of the contributions I will make in my research,
and the commission helped me phrase the title and those contributions. This is
a next-to-last milestone in the programme, so it was good to complete it.

Writing, however, is still not over as the last segment still remains - writing
the doctoral disertation. The afore mentioned contributions and title are going
to be further documented in the last big piece of writing that will wrap
everything together. This is what currently occupies most of my engagement with
the Ph.D.

I'm happy to say I am a bit less cynical about the goings on than I was in the
last post, probably because I have seen the fruits of my labor. I did need to
sideline some of the other projects I found interesting for scientific
research, but just didn't have enough time to address. Who knows, maybe I find
them useful for my dissertation and end up exploring them.

## Present

Current occupation is mainly still writing. I think it has gotten easier as I
having more experience with it helped. A significant boost in productivity came
from my mentors and colleagues, who reviewed my previous writing, pointing out
some of the bad habbits I developed. Thanks to that I managed to kick thos
habbits, which helped overall productivity.

## Future

Hopefully, 2023 is the year I complete my doctorate. The dissertation is in its
feedback correction stages, after that and some minor bureaucratic hoops to
jump through, I will defend it in front of a commission. To go with that, there
will probably be another post detaling what happened in the mean time.

<disqus />
