---
title: CV
---

Here I keep a short rundown of my past working experiences and education. You
can also download the full version, the one written here is just a brief
overview. Also, the [portfolio page](portfolio/) features the projects in a
more concise way, with links to the code if the projects were open sourced. For
a PDF format of my CV, containing private information I'd rather not disclose
publicly, feel free to [contact](contact/) me.

[[toc]]

# Work

## Končar Power Plant and Traction Engineering Inc. (2016-present)

Position: Software engineer

Implementation of SCADA backends and middleware containing business logic. Some
experience in development of single-page applications using frameworks Angular,
Vue.js and Končar's in-house framework based on virtual DOM.

Of own volition started developing solution that allow easy integration of
artificial intelligence into the SCADA system. Granted a doctoral study
scholarship by Končar to further pursue the research.

## Neoinfo (2016)

Position: Junior software engineer

Development of ERP applications and websites, using Android applications, C#
websites and MSSQL backends.

# Education

## Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb

### Doctor of Science (2019-ongoing)

Doctoral study focusing on application of machine learning to SCADA systems.
The programme consisted of courses and different obligations I needed to
satisfy. The courses I selected focused on artificial intelligence, using
statistics to discover knowledge in large datasets and complex network
analysis.

The programme requires its students to complete the following obligations:
  * present a seminar displaying current state-of-the-art of the research field
  * pass all courses
  * present a seminar outlying the scientific contribution of students research
  * publish a primary study in students field of research in a Q1 or Q2
    scientific journal
  * present smaller segments of the research on at least two conferences
  * write and defend a doctoral disertation

My research focused on machine learning application to SCADA systems. It
involved development of a SCADA component that could seamlessly analyze data
within the system and expose its conclusions over SCADA's interface.

Full programme available
[here](https://www.fer.unizg.hr/en/studies/doctoral/study_programme).

### Master of Science in Computing (2015-2017)

Continuation of the bachelor's programme, kept with the specialization for
Computer Science with application development. This programme featured more
concrete subjects, such as object-oriented design, machine learning, soft
computing and deep learning. During this programme, I also took some additional
roles, aside from being a student, such as being a team leader on some group
projects and working as a laboratory demonstrator for a subject focusing on
soft computing.

Final task for this programme was writing a thesis. My thesis focused on a
piece of software I wrote that implements configurable framework for management
of machine learning models. I applied this framework and used it to solve the
problem of gas consumption forecast. The second part of the research,
application of the framwork was later used as the topic of my first conference
paper, featured in my [portfolio](portfolio/gas_forecast.html).

The full programme can be found at the [following
link](https://www.fer.unizg.hr/en/studies/master/computing). One thing to
note, though, is that the programme has changed over the last couple of years,
so some subjects listed there might not have existed while I was studying.

### Bachelor of Science in Computing (2012-2015)

Basic education for a software engineer, started by learning basics of
programmming languages C and Java. Earlier years of the programme also featured
basics in mathematics, statistics, physics, electrical engineering, signal
processing and electronics.

The later years of the programme featured more practical subjects, such as
databases, object-oriented programming, network programming and artificial
intelligence. Selected specialization for Computer Science, but with optional
subjects focusing on application development.

The full programme can be found at the [following
link](https://www.fer.unizg.hr/en/studies/bachelor/computing). One thing to
note, though, is that the programme has changed over the last couple of years,
so some subjects listed there might not have existed while I was studying.
